(bids_stats_model)=

# BIDS stats model JSON file

This file allows you to specify the GLM to run and which contrasts to compute.

It follows
[BIDS statistical model](https://bids-standard.github.io/stats-models/index.html).

This type of JSON file is a bit more complicated than the usual JSON files, you
might be acquainted with in BIDS. So make sure you have a read through the
[JSON 101](https://bids-standard.github.io/stats-models/json_101.html) page.

Then have a look at the
[walkthrough](https://bids-standard.github.io/stats-models/walkthrough-1.html)
that explains how to build a simple model.

## Create a default BIDS model for a dataset

```{eval-rst}
.. autofunction:: src.bids_model.createDefaultStatsModel
```

## Validate your model

### In Visual Studio Code

You can add those lines to the `.vscode/settings.json` of your project to help
you validate BIDS stats models as you write them.

```{literalinclude} ../../.vscode/settings.json
   :language: json
   :emphasize-lines: 2,3,4,5,6,7
```

### In the browser

Otherwise you can use
[the online validator](https://bids-standard.github.io/stats-models/validator.html)
and copy paste your model in it.

### Using the BIDS stats model python package

```bash
pip install bsmschema
```

```python
from bsmschema.models import BIDSStatsModel

BIDSStatsModel.parse_file('model-example_smdl.json')
```

## Loading and interacting with a BIDS stats model

You can use the `BidsModel` class to create a bids model instance and interact
with. This class inherits from bids-matlab {mat:class}`+bids.Model` class.

```{eval-rst}
.. autoclass:: src.bids_model.BidsModel
   :members:
```

There are also extra functions to interact with those models.

```{eval-rst}
.. autofunction:: src.bids_model.getContrastsList
.. autofunction:: src.bids_model.getDummyContrastsList
```

## CPP SPM implementation of the BIDS stats model

CPP SPM only implements a subset of what is currently theoretically possible
with the BIDS stats model.

For example, at the subject level the CPP SPM can only access variables, that
are in the `events.tsv` in tha raw dataset or in the `regressors.tsv` or
`timeseries.tsv` generated by the preprocessing pipeline.

At the group level, it is only possible to access some variables from the
`participants.tsv` file.

### Transformation

The `Transformations` object allows you to define what you want to do to some
variables, before you put them in the design matrix.

Currently CPP SPM can only transform variables contained in `events.tsv` files.

It uses
[bids-matlab transformers](https://bids-matlab.readthedocs.io/en/latest/transformers.html)
to run those transformations. Please see this bids-matlab documentation to know
how to use them and call them in your JSON.

The advantage of this bids-matlab transformers is
that they allow you to directly add on tsv files to quickly see
what outcome a series of transformers will produce.

Below is an example on how to subtract 3 seconds from the event onsets of the
conditions `motion` listed in the `trial_type` columns of the `events.tsv` file,
and put the output in a variable called `motion`.

```json
"Transformations": {
    "Transformer": "cpp_spm",
    "Instructions": [
        {
            "Name": "Subtract",
            "Input": [
              "onset"
            ],
            "Query": "trial_type==motion",
            "Value": 3,
            "Output": [
                "motion"
            ]
        }
    ]
}
```

At the subject level, CPP SPM can only access apply transformation on the
content `events.tsv`.

### HRF

For a given `Node`, `Model.X` defines the variables that have to be put in the
design matrix.

Here `trans_?` means any of the translation parameters (in this case `trans_x`,
`trans_y`, `trans_z`) from the realignment that are stored in `_confounds.tsv`
files.

Similarly `*outlier*` means that ANY "scrubbing" regressors containing the word
`outlier` created by fMRIprep or CPP SPM to detect motion outlier or potential
dummy scans will be included.

```json
"Model": {
    "Type": "glm",
    "X": [
        "motion",
        "static",
        "trans_?",
        "rot_?",
        "*outlier*"
    ],
    "HRF": {
        "Variables": [
            "motion",
            "static"
        ],
        "Model": "spm"
    }
```

`HRF` specifies:

-   which variables of `X` have to be convolved
-   what HRF model to use to do so.

You can choose from:

-   `"spm"`
-   `"spm + derivative"`
-   `"spm + derivative + dispersion"`

Not yet implementated:

-   `"fir"`

(bids_stats_model_sofware)=

### Software
<!-- markdown-link-check-disable -->
Note that if you wanted to change the
[`SerialCorrelation` model](auto_correlation_model) used by CPP SPM, you could
do so via the `Software` object of the BIDS stats model.
<!-- markdown-link-check-enable -->

Similar you can adapt directly in the model the threshold used by SPM to create
an implicit inclusive mask when running a GLM (the value `defaults.mask.thresh`
of SPM defaults.) .

```json
{
    "Nodes": [
        {
            "Level": "Run",
            "Name": "run_level",
            "Model": {
                "X": ["trial_type.listening"],
                "HRF": {
                    "Variables": ["trial_type.listening"],
                    "Model": "spm"
                },
                "Type": "glm",
                "Software": {
                    "SPM": {
                        "SerialCorrelation": "AR(1)",
                        "InclusiveMaskingThreshold": "-Inf"
                    }
                }
            }
        }
    ]
}
```

## Parametric modulation

Those are not yet fully implemented but there is an example of how to get
started in the face repetition demo folder.

```{literalinclude} ../../demos/face_repetition/models/model-faceRepetitionParametric_smdl.json
   :language: json
```

See the help section of `convertOnsetTsvToMat` for more information.

## Examples

There are several examples of models in the
[model zoo](https://github.com/bids-standard/model-zoo) along with links to
their datasets.

Several of the :ref:`demos` have their own model and you can find several
"dummy" models (without corresponding data) used for testing
[in this folder](https://github.com/cpp-lln-lab/CPP_SPM/tree/dev/tests/dummyData/models).

An example of JSON file could look something like that:

```{literalinclude} ../../tests/dummyData/models/model-vislocalizer_smdl.json
   :language: json
```
